Durban — An 8-month-old infant survived a motor vehicle crash that killed her mother in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands on Monday afternoon. Midlands EMS spokesperson Roland Robertson said that shortly after 2pm the Midlands EMS control centre received multiple calls about a collision on the N3 just past Lions River off-ramp in the northbound carriageway. Robertson said that when crews arrived, they were met with a tragic scene where a single motor vehicle had crashed into the rear of a truck that was stationary in the emergency lane. “Sadly, the driver had succumbed to her injuries prior to crew’s arrival; however, her 8-month-old daughter who was in her car seat survived the collision,” Robertson said. “The baby was stabilised on scene by Midlands EMS advanced life support paramedics before being transported to the hospital in a serious condition.” Robertson said that all the necessary authorities were in attendance. “Our sincerest condolences to the family on the untimely passing of the deceased,” added Robertson. Police have been approached for comment. Last year, a 7-year-old boy was the sole survivor of a horror crash in Pietermaritzburg which claimed 16 lives, including his mother’s. The accident involving multiple vehicles took place on the N3 between Peter Brown and Sanctuary Road. According to preliminary reports, a truck had initially overturned on the N3. As it was still awaiting to be removed from the freeway and as vehicles were travelling trying to divert from the overturned truck, a Toyota Quantum minibus went under the truck causing a chain reaction that resulted in a nine-car pile-up. The minibus had 17 occupants who were trapped and it caught alight with 16 passengers being burnt beyond recognition. A 7-year-old boy in the minibus survived after his mother, who was trapped in the minibus, was able to squeeze him through the window and handed him over to a Road Traffic Inspectorate officer who had been attending to the truck that had overturned. Daily News