Durban — A young mother of two is alleged to have been brutally murdered by a suspect who also tried to hide her body. This was according to the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Social Development which said that it is alleged that women in Emaphephetheni village, Inanda, in the north of Durban, are living in fear after the brutal murder of a woman in her 20s. “A mother of two young children, identified as Nhle Mbonambi, was allegedly murdered by her boyfriend in the early hours of Monday,” the department said. “It is alleged that the deceased was assaulted with a mattock handle and stabbed several times with a screwdriver. “It is believed that the perpetrator was only stopped by some community members who witnessed him dragging the deceased to the nearby dam to conceal her body,” the department said. Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza sent her heartfelt condolences to the Mbonambi family following the loss of their daughter. The incident also led Khoza to call for calm in the village after the murder. She also called on men to protect women from “heartless” killers. Khoza said that it is very shocking that the young woman died so horribly in pain inflicted by a person who once claimed to love her. “This young woman has now left her two children because of a heartless man. We find solace that police moved swiftly to arrest this perpetrator. We expect nothing but to see this man rot in jail,” Khoza said. She called for calm in the community while the police continue doing their work. “We have confidence in the law enforcement agencies that they will ensure that the net closes on all those who continue to abuse and murder women. It is very disturbing to learn that women suffer constant abuse in Emaphephetheni area and a number of cases go without being reported,” Khoza said. MEC Khoza appealed to residents, particularly men, not to fold their arms while their good name is dragged through the mud by abusers and women killers. “It is the responsibility of all men to protect and provide a safer environment for women and children in their respective communities. These cases of gender-based violence occur behind closed doors, but there are some people who witness abuse. We want to see everyone working with us to expose the abusers and killers of women and children,” Khoza said. She vowed that the department was not going to relent in fighting the scourge of gender-based violence. “The department will not relent on its effort to fight and ensure women and children are protected. It should sink in everyone in our communities that women have rights, like any other citizen,” Khoza added. She also dispatched a team of social workers to meet with the Mbonambi family and provide psycho-social support. Khoza further gave assurance that the department would be in court to attend the case and provide support to the family and the community when the perpetrator appears for murder. Daily News