Durban - Outgoing head of eThekwini Municipality’s economic development and planning unit Phillip Sithole has detailed his successes over the years, saying his unit had been able to attract billions of rand in investment for the city. Sithole was on a five-year contract which came to an end on December 31. He said yesterday that he had not made up his mind about whether to reapply for the position when it was advertised. But sources in the council have said Sithole faces an uphill battle in returning to the post, as there is “political interest” regarding the matter. “I can tell you now that his chances of returning are slim. He is qualified. But there are areas where he falls short, and the position is now mired in political squabbles, with some politicians wanting him to return and others not,” said one official who asked not to be named. The city has to appoint an acting head while the process to fill the vacancy is under way. It is understood that a change in government legislation which states that deputy city managers should be appointed on a full-time basis caused a delay in finalising the process. In response to questions from “The Mercury”, Sithole confirmed that his contract had come to an end. “The municipality of eThekwini is the best employer … I’d have loved to continue, but the law prescribes that the post must be advertised. Which is good, so that there is transparency and fairness,” said Sithole. He has been with the municipality for more than two decades and rose through the ranks to serve in different positions. “I have been with eThekwini for more than 22 years. I joined the city at an entry level, a very junior position of a business facilitator. I climbed the ladder. I have been in each and every position in the economic development cluster. “I was mentored and monitored by Dr Michael Sutcliffe and Lindiwe Mahlangu. They hold a special place in my heart and mind,” he said. Sithole said over the years, he had led or been part of significant projects in the city, including: DA councillor Thabani Mthethwa said the party wished Sithole well for the future. “Like everyone, he has his successes and shortcomings but in this politically charged environment it is hard for any deputy city manager. All we can say is that we wish him well for the future.” Democratic Liberal Congress leader Patrick Pillay said Sithole’s performance was satisfactory but he did not meet the greater expectations of the citizens of eThekwini. “Investor confidence in the city is currently at an all time low due to the inability of the city to address the fundamental issues after the looting and the recent floods. “The lack of addressing these matters by Sithole does not place him in good stead,” Pillay said. THE MERCURY