Durban - The newly appointed mayor to Msinga Municipality, in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands, Felinkosi Sikhakhane has vowed to unite IFP councillors and stabilise the municipality. Sikhakhane said he would try by all means to ensure that there was unity among his party councillors as the governing party. Sikhakhane said infighting among councillors had spilt over to municipal workers, which was starting to impact on the work done in the municipality. Sikhakhane said he met the councillors last week during a full council meeting. Sikhakhane is not new in Msinga after holding two full terms as the mayor between 2006 and 2016. In its reshuffle, the IFP recalled him from the uMzinyathi District Municipality, where he was a speaker, and redeployed him to Msinga. The IFP comfortably controls Msinga after winning 20 wards out of 21. It is its traditional stronghold since the establishment of local government, having been controlled since 2000. Bidding farewell to Sikhakhane, uMzinyathi District Municipality mayor Petros Ngubane thanked him for the role he played while he was a speaker and wished him well in his new job. Ngubane also welcomed new speaker Tyson Kunene, who replaced Sikhakhane. Councillor Siyabonga Ntuli was also at the meeting. Ntuli was the one who, at the funeral of another IFP councillor, Siyanda Magubane, told the mourners that he and the deceased were attacked by the then mayor Mletheni Ndlovu.  The former mayor and his two bodyguards, Msawenkosi Malembe and Mvikeleni Mzolo, were arrested in October for the alleged possession of an illegal firearm and ammunition. They were arrested with two councillors, Thokozani Sokhela and Mhawukeleni Sokhela. All are out on bail.  The party then fired Ndlovu and was rocked by divisions after Ntuli named the mayor as the one that had killed Magubane. Speaking at the funeral, Ntuli shocked mourners when he publicly named Ndlovu as the one who killed Magubane, saying he saw him. Although Ndlovu has not yet been linked to Magubane’s murder, the IFP terminated his membership, which left people wondering why the party fired him since he was not yet found guilty even on the firearm charge.  The IFP had distanced itself from Ntuli’s utterances, calling on him to communicate with the police if he had information against Ndlovu. It did not take action against Ntuli either in what was regarded as putting the party into disrepute. The IFP has since replaced the late councillor Magubane’s place by winning a by-election, which was held last month. Daily News