Phillip Maphumulo, 28, was arrested during a police stop-and-search operation on January 21, in uMhlanga. A semi-automatic firearm and 15 live rounds of ammunition was found in the BMW M4 he was driving. Shortly thereafter, Zethu Lusawana was arrested at the uMhlanga home. Maphumulo appeared before magistrate Ashwin Singh amid strong police presence on Monday. A high-ranking official from the SAPS’ political violence task force was among those present in the gallery. State prosecutor Calvin Govender told the court that apart from the possession of a semi-automatic firearm and ammunition charges which emerged during his previous court appearance, one count of murder and two counts of attempted murder were  added. The charge sheet indicated that Maphumulo allegedly shot at the victims. Govender said the matter was a “Schedule 6 opposed bail application”. Maphumulo was represented by attorney Sibusiso Dlamini and advocate Paul Jorgensen. In his address, Jorgensen said: “Having had discussions with those investigating this matter, we understand that there may be other cases under other case numbers, from other areas that will be joined to this matter. We ask that we have one bail application in respect of these various matters.” Shortly thereafter, Maphumulo joined Lusawana, in the three possession of prohibited firearm and ammunition charges. A R1 rifle, a DMH fully automatic rifle and 90 live rounds of ammunition were among the prohibited items found at the uMhlanga home on January 21. Police investigators suspect some of the weapons might be linked to the commission of crimes. Lusawana was represented by attorney Avir Maharaj. Magistrate Singh endorsed the suggestion from the legal teams that all the matters related to Maphumulo be rolled into one for a formal bail hearing, which was set-down for February 15. Earlier in the proceedings, the court heard that Maphumulo was due to attend identification parades on Thursday for some of the matters he had been implicated in. Jorgensen said, “We want to place on record that the accused (Maphumulo) has extensive tattoos on his forearm. For a fair ID parade, we ask that individuals with similar tattoos be a part of the parade or that they wear long sleeves,” a request which Singh noted. Maphumulo featured in three ID parades on Thursday. Dlamini was confident about his client getting bail. “He should be granted bail, he is not a flight risk and he has a fixed address. Besides the State has no solid basis to oppose bail,” said Dlamini. Maharaj is also anticipating bail for Lusawana. He said: “We will be applying for bail and (are) optimistic that we will be successful.” SUNDAY TRIBUNE