Durban - Themba Mgobhozi has been keeping children off the streets by teaching them how to kick crime and drug-related activities to the kerb in the south Durban township of Lamontville.  We caught up with the martial arts teacher at the AJ Mwelase High School, where sounds of Japanese chanting by a group of 40 children and two adults could be heard. Sensei (master in Japanese) Mgobhozi was training them.  The 44-year-old black belt holder has dedicated more than a decade of his life to imparting karate skills to children from the age of 5, and even adults f r o m his community. “I decided to set up these training sessions after noting the magnitude of danger that the people of my home town were exposed to. I realised that the lack of exposure to sporting activities often resulted in them spending their time idly and doing things that were against the law. “The young ones are also prone to crime.  “Being able to defend yourself in the event of danger is a basic life skill that they needed, so I took the initiative to make it my duty to keep them busy and skilled,” said Mgobhozi. He was introduced to karate in 1990, when professionals visited his school and offered training. Mgobhozi decided to join the classes as an escape from the crime and drug consumption engaged in by his peers.  “I started teaching at Ntuthukweni Primary School, before moving to the premises of the local Roman Catholic church. I then went on to teach at Wema, before settling here at AJ Mwelase High School,” he said.  Mgobhozi, who also has a job as a senior supervisor, spends his Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Sunday evenings holding two-hour training sessions. His routine involves multiple trips around the township transporting his students to and from the training venue, at no cost.  He also attends training sessions with his instructors every Thursday to learn new techniques to share with his students, and is under the Kyokushinkan Karate IKO Royama organisation. He said a lack of funds had become a hindrance to progress.  “Most of my students do not have proper training kits as a majority of them come from struggling homes, so when they see others sporting theirs, there is a sense of inequality. Not being able to afford travelling costs for tournaments in other parts of the world also leaves them demoralised,” said Mgobhozi.  He said his Kyokushinkan classes (a style of karate) were made unique by his ability to tackle the physical, emotional and mental ability of the student. He measures his success based on the feedback received from the parents and guardians of his students.  Mgobhozi said he had no plans to abandon his classes. He hoped to get sponsorships so that he could continue with them. One of Mgobhozi’s senior students, Sinethemba Maqokolo, 33, described Mgobhozi as an honest person who was firm and dedicated to his craft. He said that the training sessions also encouraged him to maintain a sober lifestyle. “I am very happy to be a part of Mgobhozi’s class.  Being here allows me to stay away from many things that are bad, such as smoking and drinking. What we learn here equips us mentally and physically,” he said. Maqokolo, who was born and bred in Lamontville, travels to the training venue.  “I no longer live in Lamontville so I travel from Jacobs after work, come here and train and then go back home to Illovo. It is worth every second and I hope more parents consider joining their kids with him because he is the best,” he said. This is part of the Sunday Tribune’s interesting series that will focus on the unsung heroes in your community. They are the ones who get little to no recognition for their selfless efforts in improving the lives of those around them for no monetary gain. If you know of such a person and would like for them to be featured in this weekly series, please email their name and surname and two contact numbers to tribunenews@inl.co.za with Unsung Hero in the subject line. SUNDAY TRIBUNE